\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c $Id: modtest.texi 13190 2012-10-05 03:56:45Z alash325 $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename modtest.info
@settitle Modelica Testsuite
@c %**end of header

@c translation to HTML:
@c   texi2html -split_node -number -menu modtest.texi

@setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent 0
@iftex
@afourpaper
@parindent 0pt
@parskip = @medskipamount
@end iftex

@include VERSION.texi
@set UPDATED 16 July 1998
@set UPDATED-MONTH July 1998

@ifinfo
This is version @value{VERSION},
last updated @value{UPDATED},
of @cite{the Modelica testsuite},
version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 1998 Modelica Design Group
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@comment The title is printed in a large font.
@title Modelica Testsuite
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author{Modelica Design Group}

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1998 Modelica Design Group
@end titlepage

@node    Top, Conventions, (dir), (dir)
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up

This is version @value{VERSION} of @cite{the Modelica testsuite}.

This document is made to provide a collection of issues that need to be
resolved in the Modelica design process.  It also contains the full set
of Modelica test cases currently defined.

A Modelica test case is an example Modelica model that illustrates one
ore more semantical aspects of the Modelica language.  It serves several
purposes, both to provide a testbed for new implementations and to make
unresolved design issues clearer.  For testing a new implementation of
the language, the set of test cases needs to be very large, as the
number of semantic rules is large, and there are many ways in which they
interact.  Only some of these test cases are interesting for the design
process, but it seems useful to keep it as one set of test cases, and
this discussions in this document only references a selected subset of
the test cases.

@menu
* Conventions::                 
* Open Issues::                 
* Test Cases::                  Collection of files with test cases.

* Change-Log::                  

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Conventions

* General Conventions::         
* Classification::              
* Flat Modelica::               

Open Issues

* Types::                       
* Overloading and automatic type conversions::  
* Array syntax::                
* Parameters::                  
* Expression Properties::       
* Declarations::                
* Connections::                 
* Built-in types as connectors::  
* Integer expressions::         
* Redeclaration of parameter as variable::  
* Equations::                   
* Modifications::               
@end menu

@c ********************************************************************

@comment node-name,     next,          previous, up
@node     Conventions, Open Issues, Top, Top
@chapter Conventions

This chapter lists the conventions used in the text.

@menu
* General Conventions::         
* Classification::              
* Flat Modelica::               
@end menu

@node General Conventions, Classification, Conventions, Conventions
@section General Conventions

A test case is given in two formulations, first the Modelica code, and
second a ``flat'' representation that specifies the semantics of the
example.  Furthermore, each test case is classifies according to a
couple of criteria.

Each test case is formulated in one Modelica file, consisting of

@enumerate
@item
A header containing some explanatory text to describe what it tests.
@item
A classification entry. (@xref{Classification}.)
@item
The Modelica code.
@item
A flat representation. (@xref{Flat Modelica}.)
@end enumerate

Everything except the Modelica code is given as comment in the file. No
flat representation is given for incorrect examples.

@node Classification, Flat Modelica, General Conventions, Conventions
@section Classification

Each test case contains a classification entry of the form

@samp{keywords:}  @var{keyword}  [@samp{,} @var{keyword}]* @*
@samp{status:}    @var{correctness}

The @var{keyword} clauses are used to tag each test with a number of
keywords to indicate what aspect of the semantic specification it tests.

The following list contains all the keywords used.
@var{aspect}(s):
@table @samp
@item algorithm
@item array
@item connect
@item constant
@item declaration
@item equation
@item extends
@item function
@item modification
@item partial
@item protected
@item redeclare
@item scoping
@item shadow
@item type
@item unknown
@end table

The @var{correctness} of a test case is given as one of:
@table @samp
@item correct
The example is correct.
@item incorrect
The example is incorrect according to the formal Modelica semantics or
syntax.
@item erroneous
The example is formally correct, but it contains a modeling error that 
should be outlined.

<david: What does this really mean and why is it needed here?>
@end table

@node Flat Modelica,  , Classification, Conventions
@section Flat Modelica

The aim of the flat representation is to clearly specify the semantics
of a test case. This is done using a low-level format. The format has the 
same basic syntax as Modelica.

The following restrictions apply:

@itemize @bullet

@item 
Flat models contain only components of predefined types. Predefined
attributes, e.g. @code{start}, @code{unit}, @code{min}, @code{max},
@dots{} are declared as separate variables.

@item 
A flat model has one declaration section, optionally followed by an
equation section, which is followed by zero or more algorithm
sections.

@item
The order of equations is undefined.

@item
The order of statements in each algorithm section is kept intact, but
the order in which the algorithm sections appear is undefined.

@item
No modifications are used, i.e. equation modifications made in the
Modelica source code are stated in the equation section of the flat
representation.  Redeclarations are taken care of while flattening the
model.

@item
No connect statements are used, i.e. the corresponding connection
equations are stated.

@item
For loops are not used in equations.  They are unrolled in the flat
representation.

@end itemize

The following extensions are made:

@itemize @bullet

@item
All array components are declared separately.  If the Modelica model
contains the declaration

@example
Real x[2,3];
@end example

the flat model will contain the following declarations:

@example
Real x[1,1];
Real x[1,2];
Real x[1,3];
Real x[2,1];
Real x[2,2];
Real x[2,3];
@end example

This means that the brackets in declaration do not denote array size, as
they do in normal Modelica.

<david: This is a consequence of how the semantic specification looks at
the components.  Using the simple @samp{x[2,3]} could be done instead,
as it is shorter and introduces no ambuguities.>

@item
Identifiers may contain dots @samp{.} (resulting from subcomponents in the
originating Modelica code) and tilde signs @samp{~} (see below).
Identifiers may also contain subscripts, as in @samp{x[1]}.  This is a
consequence of the fact that all array components are declared separately.

@item
In order to be able to declare a local variable @var{var} of a function 
@var{funcname}, an identifier of the form 
@example
@var{funcname}@samp{~}@var{n}@samp{.}@var{var}
@end example
with @var{n} a number is introduced. In this way calls to internal
functions (that are defined in Modelica) can be expanded, e.g. to
express the semantics of assigning input and output variables.
The number @var{n} should be incremented for each call to the same
function from the same class.

<Peter: The expansion is not possible for recursive functions.>

<david: This is still experimental. It might be removed.>

Calls to predefined and external functions remain in the flat
representation as they are in the Modelica code.

@item
Automatic type conversions defined in the Modelica semantics, e.g. from 
an @code{Integer} @code{i} to @code{Real}, are stated using the target
type name as conversion operator, i.e. @code{Real(i)}.

@item
A new postfix subscripting operator is introduced.  In the flat model,
it is necessary to be able to subscript expression, so the syntax
@samp{expression[x]} is allowed.  This is currently not allowed in
Modelica.

@item
Almost no overloading of operators occus in the flat Modelica.  If a
model contains an array multiplied by a scalar, the flat model does not
use the multiplication sign, but an operator that is specialized for
that particular operation.

The normal integer and real arithmetic operators are still overloaded,
but they should not, really.

@item
Due to the extensions a flat model representation is not valid
Modelica.  Therefore, the class definition in the flat code is declared
as @code{fclass} to differentiate it from Modelica's @code{class}.

@end itemize

The flat modelica grammar is probably not even context-free.

@c ********************************************************************

@comment node-name,     next,          previous, up
@node    Open Issues, Test Cases, Conventions, Top
@chapter Open Issues

The issues brought up here are not yet clarified in the current
Modelica language specification (Version 1c of the Modelica report).

@menu
* Types::                       
* Overloading and automatic type conversions::  
* Array syntax::                
* Parameters::                  
* Expression Properties::       
* Declarations::                
* Connections::                 
* Built-in types as connectors::  
* Integer expressions::         
* Redeclaration of parameter as variable::  
* Equations::                   
* Modifications::               
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Types, Overloading and automatic type conversions, Open Issues, Open Issues
@section Types

Modelica needs a well-defined type system, with a clear notion of what a
type actually is.

@subsection Functions

Functions have a type, which looks something like @code{Real => Real}
for a function from reals to reals.  This goes for the builtin functions
too.

This causes a few problems.  For instance, the function @code{size} is
not well-defined.  What is the type of its first argument?  There is no
type called ``Array''.

Another problem concerns array dimension sizes. Consider the following example:

@example
function f
  input Real x[:];
  output Real y[size(x,1)];
algorithm
  @dots{}
end f;

model M
  Real a[17], b[17], c[3], d[3];
equation
  b = f(a);
  c = f(a);
  d = f(c);
end M;
@end example

First of all, is it possible to define y in the way described above?  If
not, how would it otherwise be defined?

This defines a function that takes an input of type @code{Real[:]} and
has an output of type @code{Real[:]}.  The size of @code{y} cannot be
known by looking at the definition of @code{f}.

This has the consequence that the expression @code{f(a)} has type
@code{Real[:]}, which is not equivalent to either the type of @code{b}
or @code{c}.

What would be desirable is a way to determine that the type of the
expression @code{f(a)} actually has type @code{Real[17]}.

When comparing the function definition to normal class definitions, one
thing worth noting is that in other classes, the type of components
declared like @code{y} is determined at instantiation time.  So what if
we say that the function @code{f} is implicitly instantiated for each
occation it appears in the model source?

This would mean that @code{f} would be instantiated three times when
then model @code{M} is instantiated.  Think of it in this way:

@example
Model M
  Real a[17], b[17], c[3], d[3];

  f f~1 = f(x = a);
  f f~2 = f(x = a);
  f f~3 = f(x = c);
equation
  b = f~1.y;
  c = f~2.y;
  d = f~3.y;
end M;
@end example

Here I instantiate the function @code{f} and call the three instances
@code{f~1}, @code{f~2} and @code{f~3}, respectively.

In the instance @code{f~1}, it would be possible to determine the size
of @code{x} (possibly using some extra magic), and the size of @code{y}
could be derived.  Then the type of the expressions would be fully
known, and the translator would be able to tell that the first and third
equations are valid, but the second is invalid.

It would be nice if this could be describe in terms of normal
instantiation, but there are a couple of issues that need to be cleared
first.

@itemize @bullet

@item
Recursive functions can not be described in this way.  But since we
decided in Manchester that recursive functions are disallowed, this
doesn't really matter.

@item
What is needed to determine the type of a component?  Currently, as I
see it, the declaration of a component needs to be specified in the
declaration.  The question is whether the declaration equation may
affect the type of the component.

I'd like to, as far as possible, treat declaration equations like any
normal equations, meaning that @code{x} and @code{y} are treated equally
in the example below:

@example
@dots{}
  Real x[:] = [1,2,3];
  Real y[:];
equation
  y = [1,2,3];
@dots{}
@end example

But if it is necessary to be able to determine that the size of @code{x}
is 3, then there is a difference between the two types of equations.
Saying that the translator should determine also that the size of
@code{y} is 3 does not seem reasonable.

This issue does proabably relate to other things than functions also.

@end itemize

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Overloading and automatic type conversions, Array syntax, Types, Open Issues
@section Overloading and automatic type conversions

Many of the operators in Modelica are overloaded on the types of its
arguments.  The plus operator is e.g. both an integer addition operator
and a real addition operator.  These two operations are similar, but not
the same.  It also doubles as a string concatenation operator, which is
a completely different operation, with other properties (it is not
associative, for instance).  The overloading of the asterisk operator is
even more extensive with both scalar and matrix multiplication.

@subsection Defining the operators

All operators need to be defined in terms of what they operate on.  A
short table of types and operations should be sufficient.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Array syntax, Parameters, Overloading and automatic type conversions, Open Issues
@section Array syntax

@subsection Array indexing operator

Should the indexing operator @code{[]} be a real postfix operator on
arbitrary array expressions?  Currently, the indexing is part of the
@code{component_reference} grammar rule, which means that you can only
index variables.


The following is currently not allowed:

@example
x = cross(A,B)[2]
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Parameters, Expression Properties, Array syntax, Open Issues
@section Parameters

Saying that parameter setting should be left until after compile-time
might not be so easy.

@subsection Compile-time? What compile-time?

The term ``compile-time'' is used several times in the discussion about
Modelica, but it is never clearly defined what is meant by this.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Expression Properties, Declarations, Parameters, Open Issues
@section Expression Properties

In several places in the discussions about what may or may not appear in
expressions there are restrictions applied in a somewhat ad-hoc manner.
This should be cleared up and formalized.

Each expression has a number of properties that can be derivd by
analyzing its subexpressions.

@itemize @bullet

@item
A type. For each kind of expression (addition, logical-and etc.) it is
well-defined what the type of the expression is.  The only exception are
overloaded operators, but that problem is another issue
(@xref{Overloading and automatic type conversions}.)

@item
A ``variability'' property, which describes whether the expression is a
constant expression or not.  This can be stratified into the levels
constant / parameter / discrete / variable, just as components can be
declared constant etc.

@item
A ``differentiability'' property.  I'm not so sure about what this is,
but it seems to be needed.  For instance, the report states that the
@code{div()} function is not differentiable.

How is this property determined for function calls in the general case?

@end itemize

When these properties are defined, they can be used to define what may
appear where.  Some examples:

@itemize @bullet

@item
An array index must have type @code{Integer}.

@item
An array index in a @code{connect} statement must be a constant
expression of type @code{Integer}.

@item
Expressions in equations must be differentiable.

@end itemize

I might be necessary to provide explicit information about the prperties
of functions.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Declarations, Connections, Expression Properties, Open Issues
@section Declarations

@subsection Array modifications

The type system makes the test case @ref{ArrayModification7} illegal.
This seems natural too me, but I just want to make sure that nobody
complains about this.

@subsection Array element modifications

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Connections, Built-in types as connectors, Declarations, Open Issues
@section Connections

@subsection Parameters and constants in connectors
Should connection equations be generated for parameters and
constants? This issue has been discussed at the 10th design meeting. But 
no decision was made there.
@* (@xref{ConnectTypes}.)

This has been discussed at both the 12th and 13th design meetings, but
no agreement has been reached.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Built-in types as connectors, Integer expressions, Connections, Open Issues
@section Built-in types as connectors

Are variables of predefined types, e.g. @code{Real}, valid
connectors? This is not specified in the Modelica 1c report.
It is assumed to be true here.
@* (@xref{Units1}, and @ref{Units2}.)

In the Modelica 1c report, section 4.6 ``Matrices'', subsection ``Block
Diagrams'', vectors of type @code{Real} are used as inputs and
outputs. But no example is given in the discussion about connection of
inputs and outputs there.

This has been discussed at the 13th design meeting in Reno.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Integer expressions, Redeclaration of parameter as variable, Built-in types as connectors, Open Issues
@section Integer expressions

Version 1c of the Modelica report, appendix B.9, introduces built-in
functions for doing things like integer division. Most of the functions
have return type @code{Real}. But should not the following be allowed?

@example
model Foo
  Real a[10];
  Real b[20];
  Integer i;
equation
  for i in 2:20 loop
    a[div(i,2)] = b[i];
  end for;
end Foo;
@end example

There are two problems with the current specification:

@enumerate
@item 
Possibly not only the built-in function @code{size}, but also
@code{div}, @code{ceil}, @code{floor}, and @code{ndims} should have
return type @code{Integer}. If used in @code{Real} expressions, then
the result should be converted from @code{Integer} to @code{Real}
(as for any integer used in a real expression). 

(@xref{Integer2Real}.)

But this solution has another problem, which is more an implementation
problem. The @code{Integer} type is often implemented as a limited type
of typically 32 bits, which would mean that if you call
ceiling(large_real_numer) you would overflow the integer type.

One solution taken by some other languages (like C) is to introduce a
double set of functions that conceptually do the same thing. On set that
returns integers, and one that returns reals.  A ``smaller'' solution
would be to only introduce an integer version of the @code{floor}
function, and write @code{int_floor(div(n,m))}, but then the gain would
be very small.

@item 
The use of the mentioned built-in functions should not only be allowed
in @code{Boolean} equations and expressions, but also in @code{Integer}
equations and expressions (e.g. index expressions). (See the example
above and @ref{Expression Properties})
@end enumerate

This was discussed at the 12th design meeting.  I'm not certain of what
was actually decided there.

It was also discussed at the 13th design meeting.  The conclusion was
that functions with integer return type were needed.

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Redeclaration of parameter as variable, Equations, Integer expressions, Open Issues
@section Redeclaration of parameter as variable

Version 1c of the Modelica report, appendix B2, section ``Redeclaration'',
says that variability constraints may only become stronger in
redeclarations. (@xref{DisturbedResistance2}.)

It should be noted that, using inheritance, one can formulate examples
that break the rule. Should this be valid? (@xref{DisturbedResistance3},
@ref{DisturbedResistance4}.)

This could probably be solved by modifying the subtype relation (but the
Manchester meeting decided otherwise, for some reason).

@subsection Resolutions from the Manchester meeting

@itemize @bullet
@item
Type prefix is not part of type equivalence. 
@item
Multiple inheritance should be forced to be equivalent. 
@item
Problem with correctness of equations, for example 
@example
C*der(v) = i 
der(C*v) = i 
@end example
@item
Open issue! Should add constraints to extends, similar to
redeclare. Should require that type-prefix is identical for extends.
@end itemize

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node For loops, Modifications, Redeclaration of parameter as variable, Open Issues
@section For loops

What are the restrictions on loop variables?  Can a loop variable also
be used in equations?

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Equations, Modifications, Redeclaration of parameter as variable, Open Issues
@section Equations

@subsection Discretes and equations

The test case Discrete2 (@ref{Discrete2}) depends on the expression
properties. If it is said that equations can only contain differentiable
expressions, then this is clearly illegal.

@xref{Expression Properties}

@c --------------------------------------------------------- 
@node Modifications,  , Equations, Open Issues
@section Modifications

@subsection Modification of class definitions

The Reno meeting agreed that it would no longer be allowed to modify
class definitions in a modification list.  Does everebody agree on this?

All the following sections depend on this decision.

@subsection Double modifications

The Manchester meeting decided that the same component may not be
modified twice in the same modification clause, i.e. the following
example is invalid since @code{x} is modified twice.

@example
Foobar a(x = 5, y = 3, x = 7);
@end example

The following two examples are also disallowed.

@example
Foobar(x[2:8] = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7], x[3] = 17);
Foobar(a.x = 17, a(x = 15, y = 16);
@end example

But it is still possible to write something that could be possible to
interpret as a double modification. The following example is taken from
@ref{Modification6}.

@example
model M
  model Foo
    parameter Real q = 1.0;
  end Foo;
  Foo f(q=2.0);
end M;
 
model Modification6
  M m1(Foo(q=3.0), f(q=4.0));
  M m2(f(q=4.0), Foo(q=3.0));
end Modification6;
@end example

Although @code{f.q} are modified twice on both the declaration of
@code{m1} and @code{m2}, this is not disallowed, and should not be
disallowed.  But the semantics have to be defined.  There are three
alternatives.

@enumerate
@item
Instance modifications take precedence over class modifications.
@item
Class modificaitons take precedence over class modifications.
@item
The textual order of the modifications determines the precedence.
@end enumerate

If we follow the guiding principle that more specific modifications take
precedence over more general, then the first alternative should be
chosen.  This fits well with how outer (more specific) modifications
take precedence over inner (more general) modifications.

This might seem a little more natural if we look at the following
example.

@example
model ResistorCircuit
  parameter Integer N
  Reistor r[N];
  @dots{}
end SeralResistors;

model Foo
  ResistorCircuit rr(N = 17, Resistor(R = 1.0), r[5] = 1.0);
end Foo;
@end example

@xref{Modification6}, @ref{Modification8}, @ref{Modification9}

@subsection Class modifications should be propagated down

In @ref{Modification10}, we see how a class modification is valid while
instantiating a hierachy of submodels.  This is what class modifications
are for, I guess.  I actually think class modification mostly are a pain
in the butt.

@subsection Class modifications on non-local classes

First of all, should it be possible to modify classes defined outside
the class being instantiated? @xref{Modification2} for an example.  I
suppose it should be possible.

But there are some interesting consequences.  In @ref{Modification11},
we see how this leads to a situation where it is impossible to determine
if a modification is a class modification or a component modification.

@c ********************************************************************

@node Test Cases, Change-Log, Open Issues, Top
@appendix Test Cases

@c
@c generated by Makefile
@c

@include cases.texi

@c
@c end Makefile
@c

@c ======================================================================
@node Change-Log,  , Test Cases, Top
@appendix Change-Log

@appendixsec Version 1.0-dk2 to 1.0-dk3

@itemize @bullet

@item
Stopped placing each test case on its own page.  This drastically
decreased the number of pages in the PostScript version.

@end itemize

@appendixsec Version 1.0-dk1 to 1.0-dk2

@itemize @bullet

@item
Added @ref{Modifications}.

@end itemize

@appendixsec Version 1.0 to 1.0-dk1

A lot of things were added and changed by David.

@appendixsec Version 0.9.1 to 1.0

The following changes result from the discussion at the 12th Modelica
design meeting in Manchester. It is referred to the minutes of the
12th Modelica design meeting.

@enumerate
@item
New test cases, @ref{Overwriting3}, and @ref{Modification9}, according to
N.1 and N.2, respectively, given in the minutes.
@item
@xref{ScopeDeclaration1}, @ref{ScopeDeclaration2}, @ref{Lookup5}: new
header.
@item
@xref{Faculty1}: changed correctness to @samp{incorrect}.
@item
New test case, @ref{ReplaceFunction}, according to N.3 of section 2.2 ``Is
Modelica a strict define­before­use language?'' of the minutes. 
@item
@xref{DeclareConstant1}, @ref{DeclareConstant3}: new header.
@item
@xref{ModifyConstant2}: changed correctness to @samp{correct}.
@item
New test cases, @ref{ModifyConstant5}, @ref{ModifyConstant6}, to check
modification of final constants.
@item
@xref{ConnectTypes}: introduced connection equations for parameters and
constants in the flat representation.
@item
@xref{ConnectHierarchical2}: changed correctness to @samp{correct}.
@item
@xref{ConnectFlowEffort}: simplified; 
added new test case, @ref{RedeclareFlowEffort}. 
@item
@xref{ConstructParameters}: added keywords @samp{input} and
@samp{output} to declarations in the flat model representation.

@c @item 
@c @xref{Overwriting1}: use term @samp{replace} instead of @samp{overwrite}.
@item
@xref{Real2Integer1}: changed correctness to @samp{erroneous} and corrected
flat model representation.
@c @item
@c @xref{XPowers3}: The integer 'n' must be declared as constant.
@end enumerate

With these modifications most unclear issues of version 0.9.1 are
resolved. (@xref{Open Issues}, for remaining questions.)

@appendixsec Version 0.9 to 0.9.1

@enumerate
@item 
@xref{ConditionalArrayExpression1}: corrected classification (&array).

@ignore
@item
@xref{Connections}, @ref{ConnectTypes}: extended discussion in
subsection ``Parameters and constants in connectors''
(generation of assertions?).
@item
@xref{Connections}: new subsection ``Connections and Modifications''.
@item
@xref{Connections}: new subsection ``Directed connections''.
@end ignore

@end enumerate

@contents
@bye
