.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Title 
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH OMNotebook 1 "The Open Source Modelica Consortium" "1.5.0" "The OpenModelica Project" -*- nroff -*-
.
.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
.SH NAME
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
OMNotebook \- Start script, set environment variables and invoke the Qt
based client application OMNotebook
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B OMNotebook
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.B OMNotebook
is a script that starts the Qt based client application \fBOMNotebook\fP of
the \%OpenModelica Project. The client application \%\fBOMNotebook\fP is a
front end between the user and the OpenModelica Compiler/Interpreter
\fBomc\fP. The script \fBOMNotebook\fP knows two starting modes:
.
.IP \(bu 3
In the first mode it will be launched from a menu like GNOME menu or Debian
menu. In this case the script will set the required environment variables,
will create a sub directory with the name OMWorkspace in user's home directory
and will changed into it. After the change, the application \fBOMNotebook\fP
will be launched. If the starting script \fBOMNotebook\fP found a directory
OMWorkspace in the user's home directory, it will switch into the directory
OMWorkspace and then it will start the application \fBOMNotebook\fP.
.
.P
.RS 3
The start of the client application \fBOMNotebook\fP will trigger the start of
the Compiler/Interpreter \fBomc\fP. The Compiler/Interpreter \fBomc\fP will run
in server mode and will communicate over CORBA with the client application
\fBOMNotebook\fP.
.
.P
Runs the compiler \fBomc\fP in an independent started server process prior to
the start of the \fBOMNotebook\fP script, the starting client application
\fBOMNotebook\fP will use the running \fBomc\fP as server. The client
application \fBOMNotebook\fP will not launch its own \fBomc\fP server.
.
.RE
.
.IP \(bu 3
In the second mode the script \fBOMNotebook\fP will be launched from a console.
When the user starts the script \fBOMNotebook\fP from his or her home
directory, the script gives a usage hint and will return to the console prompt.
Starting the script from another directory then the user's home directory, the
script will set the required environment variables and will run the application
\fBOMNotebook\fP. The directory OMWorkspace will not be created like in the
above case. The current directory will be the working directory for the client
application \fBOMNotebook\fP and the indirect started Compiler/Interpreter
server \fBomc\fP.
.
.P
.RS 3
Runs the compiler \fBomc\fP in an independent started server process like in
the first case, the client application \fBOMNotebook\fP will use \fBomc\fP as
server. The client \fBOMNotebook\fP will not start its own \fBomc\fP server.
The communication between the client and the server will use the CORBA
interface.
.
.P
.RE
The special treatment of the user's home directory is necessary, because the
compiler \fBomc\fP produce during his run C++ source code and some auxiliary
files. These files will be stored in the current working directory. The
behavior of the script \fBOMNotebook\fP avoids the clutter of the user's
home directory.
.
.P
The Qt based client application \fBOMNotebook\fP is a Mathematica style
Notebook for Modelica. In separate graphical viewers the user can further
investigate and manipulate the results of the simulation. These viewers are
the JAVA based application Ptolemy and the Qt based application graphWindow.
The purpose of \fBOMNotebook\fP is to provide an advanced \%Modelica teaching
tool. This release of \fBOMNotebook\fP includes DrModelica. A package which
provides all the examples from Peter Fritzson's book the \*[lq]Principles of
Object-Oriented Modeling and Simulation with Modelica 2.1\*[rq].
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.B DRMODELICAHOME
This variable contains the absolute path towards the \%DrModelica
package which provides all the examples from Peter Fritzson's book the
\*[lq]Principles of Object-Oriented Modeling and Simulation with
Modelica 2.1\*[rq].
.RS
.IP "Default directory:" 19
.I /usr/share/omnotebook/drmodelica/
.RE
.TP
.B OPENMODELICAHOME
This variable contains the absolute path towards the \%OpenModelica
Compiler/Interpreter executable \fBomc\fP.
.RS
.IP "Default directory:" 19
.I /usr/
.RE
.TP
.B OPENMODELICALIBRARY
Absolute path towards the \%OpenModelica library \fBModelica\fP.
.RS
.IP "Default directory:" 19
.I /usr/share/omlibrary/modelicalib/
.RE
.TP
.B QTHOME
Absolute path towards the directory with Qt libraries. The Compiler/Interpreter
\fBomc\fP use these libraries to build the simulation executable. Setting the
environment variable is only necessary, if \fBomc\fP is compiled with Qt
support. The Compiler/Interpreter \fBomc\fP of the Debian package is compiled
with Ot support by default.
.RS
.IP "Default directory:" 19
${\fBOPENMODELICAHOME\fP}\fI/lib/\fP
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The start script \fBOMNotebook\fP launches the Qt based client application
\%\fBOMNotebook\fP. Some supplementary informations about the application will
be found in the following sub section.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Executables:
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.IP \(bu 3
\fBOMNotebook\fP \- OpenModelica Notebook a Mathematica style Notebook for
Modelica
.
.RS
.IP "File:" 7
.I OMNotebook
.PD 0
.IP "Path:" 7
.I /usr/bin/
.PD
.RE
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.BR omc (1),
.BR OMShell (1),
.BR OMShell\-terminal (1)
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The original author was William Spinelli. Changes and improvements were made
by Robert Wotzlaw \%<Robert.Wotzlaw at web.de>.
.P
The current author isn't a member of the Open Source Modelica Consortium (OSMC)
nor a collaborator at the Programming Environment Laboratory (PELAB),
Department of Computer and Information Science (IDA) of the Linkoeping
University (LiU). He supports the OpenModelica Project as volunteer.
